This repository contains all the code and outputs of the Y4 Undergraduate "Project: Portfolio Optimization: A Volatility-Driven Scenario Generation Approach"

Project Abstract:

This project introduces a rigorous scenario generation framework for portfolio optimization, specifically designed to adapt to the ever-changing dynamics of market volatility. Motivated by the shortcomings of traditional methods , we integrate multiple scenario generation techniques in a volatility-centered approach, including historical sampling, simple and block bootstrap methods, and Monte Carlo simulations using Normal and Student's $t$ distributions, as well as temporally evolving models such as ARMA-GARCH and Regular Vine Copulas. In an attempt to evaluate the efficiency of these scenario generation methods, we implement a periodic sampling algorithm which partitions the historical return data from a selection of 9 stocks from the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) into distinct volatility regimes (low, medium, and high); thereby constructing a dataset for analysis under varied market conditions. Subsequently, we integrate our generated scenarios into the portfolio optimization models- Mean-Variance, Mean-CVaR, and Max-Sharpe. Then, a scenario generation-portfolio optimization combinative analysis is performed and applied to all volatility regimes. Our training results indicate that the optimal scenario generation method depends both on the prevailing market volatility and on the specific optimization objective. Out-of-sample tests further reveal that portfolios optimized using our adaptive framework significantly outperform traditional benchmarks. In general, our findings underscore the potential of a volatility-based approach to enhance portfolio performance in varied market conditions.

Comments:

Complete research paper will be uploaded once marking is completed, as per the University of Edinburgh's project guidelines.
